Just Have Less
Bottega Veneta’s Tomas Maier.


By John Colapinto, December 27, 2010

Note: This is an excerpt from the original article, that has been significantly modified.

Maier strips away superfluities until his objects achieve “a certain nothingness.”

Tomas Maier, the creative director and head designer of the Italian fashion label Bottega Veneta, is one of those people who want to erase every fault in their range of sight. He describes himself as someone who “can’t get happy.” In his thirties, he corrected the asymmetry of his first and last names by editing the “h” out of Thomas. 
At Bottega Veneta, Maier designs men’s and women’s ready-to-wear clothing, along with housewares, furniture, watches, porcelain, and jewelry. But it is his leather accessories—bags, shoes, wallets—that are the label’s signature, and its best-selling items. In everything he designs, Maier shows an acute sensitivity to those infinitesimal irritants which most people can overlook. For instance, the coffee saucer at the Bulgari Hotel, in Milan, where he used to stay. “It drove me crazy,” he told me. “Every morning. You lifted up the cup and by the time you put it down—because the saucer was too curved up—the spoon had always slid down.” With a certain fierce pleasure, he pantomimed the entire act. “Now, in this hand you hold the newspaper, and with this hand you lift the coffee up and have a sip, and you want to put it down and you put it crooked on the saucer because this spoon is underneath. You drip half the coffee over, so that means you have to put the paper down, you have to take the glasses off, pick up the spoon—” He threw up his hands. “I mean, hello! Whoever designed that should have designed it right.”

At such moments, Maier recalls characters in the novels of Kingsley Amis, those finely tuned instruments of outrage who find catharsis in cataloguing all the human failures around them. (A character in “One Fat Englishman” grows so enraged at a towel that insists on slipping from the towel bar that he knots it in place and then “consolidates” the knots with water.) In airports, where Maier spends a great deal of time waiting for flights between his home in Florida and his office in Milan, he will watch people, enumerating the design horrors on display. “I just sit there and look at people and I see what’s the malfunction and how can we help that man,” he said. “I pity him! That he makes his life so miserable—himself!—by carrying some ill-functioning bag that rips his jacket half off”—Maier threw himself sideways in his chair—“and gives him a bad shoulder ache at the end of the day. And it makes him look an idiot on top of everything.”
Maier’s goal as a designer is to strip away all unnecessary parts until a dress or a shirt or a bag or a watch has been reduced to its functional essence—until it achieves what he calls “a certain nothingness.”
“You look at a piece of abstract art and it’s a white canvas,” he said. “And it’s just, like, a line, and somebody standing next to you says, ‘I really could do that.’ ” He rolled his eyes. “Actually, no.”
When Maier took over Bottega Veneta, in June, 2001, the fashion world was ruled by bling-laden excess, symbolized by the phenomenon of the It Bag. The status handbag had existed since at least the nineteen-fifties, when Grace Kelly carried a boxy Hermès purse to hide her pregnant belly from paparazzi. But the era of the modern It Bag dates to the late nineties, when Sarah Jessica Parker’s character in “Sex and the City” wielded a bread-loaf-shaped clutch, made by Fendi, whose “F” clasp announced both the bag’s origins and its steep price. The bag, which is known as the Baguette, sparked a worldwide demand, and soon every major label was competing to create the new purse of the season.
For fashion companies, the It Bag is an important source of revenue. It’s a multigenerational purchase (daughter, mother, and grandmother), and often a prop for an entire label. Not everyone can wear the trousers, the mantra goes, but everyone can carry the bag. Thus, cheap coated-canvas bags were converted into objects of consumer fetish with eye-grabbing adornments: denim and diamonds, graffiti, crystal beads, and, almost always, a prominent logo. “There was a stage when, however unappealing something was, if it had enough logos written all over it, somebody seemed to buy it,” Suzy Menkes, the fashion critic of the International Herald Tribune, says. Menkes calls the period “a worldwide aberration,” as if she were talking about the concomitant era of credit-default swaps and subprime-mortgage lending.
“The It Bag is a totally marketed bullshit crap,” Maier told me. “You make a bag, you put all the components in it that you think could work, you send it out to a couple of celebrities, you get the paparazzi to shoot just when they walk out of their house. You sell that to the cheap tabloids, and you say in a magazine that there’s a waiting list. And you run an ad campaign at the same time. I don’t believe that’s how you make something that’s lasting—that becomes iconic as a design.”
Maier’s first act upon taking over at Bottega Veneta was to design a bag that looked, in the context of the times, like a rebuke: a woven leather sack with two handles. With no logos, no hardware, no adornments, not even a closure, the bag, which Maier called the Cabat, looked like a beach tote––albeit a beach tote with a six-thousand-dollar price tag. Furthermore, Maier announced that, rather than scrapping the bag in six months, as most fashion companies would, he planned to put it down the runway every year. The usual It Bag was defined by its “girliness”; his was a unisex sack. Maier also notified his bosses at Gucci Group, which owns Bottega Veneta, that for his first year at the label he would give no interviews and run no advertising. Lisa Pomerantz, who started as the communications director of Bottega Veneta just as Maier took over, told me, “I thought he was either crazy or brilliant.”
In any case, that first year came and went, and apparently the Gucci Group decided Maier was not crazy. Maier had loosened up a little. He was now ready to give interviews. That is where I came in. I was to be his first interview. 
Just before I stepped into Bottega Veneta’s new headquarters, in Milan (a minimalist, modern high-rise building of stainless steel and sanded glass), one of his public-relations minions, met me outside the entrance and inspected me as if before a military parade, then plucked a microscopic piece of lint from my lapel. “Oh, God,” she said. “If that’s there, he won’t be able to think of anything else.”
I was buzzed inside the entrance. There he was. Tomas Maier. 
Maier is fifty-three, and has the aspect of a hipster monk: hair shaved to dots on his scalp; grooved, hollow cheeks; watchful blue eyes; a thin-lipped mouth set in a down-curving line. Speaking with a heavy German accent—Maier grew up in the Black Forest.
“Please, leave all electronic devices here” Maier gestured to a black and chrome table, “We have problems with industrial espionage.”  
Reluctantly, I put my smart-phone on the table. An impassive security guard slid it into a drawer.
“Follow me,” Maier said. 

We ascended in an elevator, the interior of which was clean, modern, beautiful, and hummed quietly, but was without the typical functional accouterments of elevators … such as buttons and floor indicators. I wondered how it was operated. Maier seemed to read my mind. He caught my eye and nodded sagely.

The elevator stopped. Maier exited.
“Follow me,” he said.  
We traversed an absolutely labyrinthian series of hallways and passages, going straight and then left and right, crossing a pedestrian bridge – a brief view to the rainy streets of Milan below - to another part of the building. After leaving the elevator, we saw no signs of other workers, any other human beings, except briefly the flash of women’s ankle and its accompanying sleek high-heeled shoe disappearing into a doorway. We entered another elevator and ascended. 
“You have a remote office,” I said smiling. 
Maier raised one finger. 
“We don’t wish to be disturbed”
After exiting the second elevator, two or three more turns, and we entered – yes, you guessed it – rather minimalistic room, which at least did have large floor to ceiling windows on one side. 
He invited me to make myself comfortable at the room’s only seating space: a strict-looking metal table in the center of the room, with two chairs on opposite sides of the table. 
We regarded each other across the table. He said, “Well, what can I help you with? What would you like to know?”
I pulled out a small notebook and a pen, which felt strangely retro in this sleek environment. 
“Can I take notes?” I asked. He nodded.
“Well, just last week,” I started, “I interviewed Zac Posen, the noted young New York designer, and he said…”
“Excuse me? Zac Posen?” Maier said.
“Yes, that’s right,” I said.
Maier stood up. “Wait. I will be right back.”
He moved to the door, walked out, the door closing behind him with a click. 
I waited for a while, and then another while, amusing myself by examining every bit of the contents of the room. Well, that was easy. The table had no drawers. The room was all stainless-steel walls with grey slate inset panels. Where was he anyway? I looked at my watch, but I had no watch on my arm. I had relied on my smart phone for this trip, and it was somewhere down below in the security guard’s desk. Oh, for the love of God, where was he anyway? I stood up and walked to the window. We were high up. I could dimly see the streets of Milan far below in the mist. The raindrops pitter-patted against the sleek, thick glass wall. Pitter-pat. Pitter-pat. It was hard to tell in this gloomy weather, but it seemed like were now getting into late afternoon.
“Oh, very well then,” I said to myself, walking over to the door. There was no conventional doorknob. of course, but there was a depression in the heavy stain-less steel door where one could insert one’s fingers and pull. I did, and it did not budge. The door was locked, securely locked.
“What now?” I thought to myself. 
